Update profiling section (#266)
precice/precice.github.io: pages/docs/tooling/tooling-performance-analysis.md

---
title: Performance analysis
permalink: tooling-performance-analysis.html
keywords: tooling, json, performance, events, analysis, cpu time, hpc, profiling
summary: "preCICE comes with an internal performance analysis framework"
---

## Introduction

> preCICE uses an internal profiling framework to measure code sections inside and between API calls of the library.

Reviewer: It could be good to have one sentence somewhere on why we develop our own profiling framework.

> Existing external frameworks cannot cope with the complexity of the multi-executable setup of preCICE. To understand the performance of a coupled run, it is necessary to look at the interplay of all coupled participants.

or similar

> These named sections are called `events` and each event generates records duing runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These named sections are called `events` and each event generates records during runtime.
```

> Each rank gathers local records and writes them to a JSON file in the `precice-events` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each rank of each participant gathers local records and writes them to a JSON file. To store these JSON files, preCICE creates a directory called `precice-events` in the current working directory of each participant.
```

> These files then need to be post-processed and merged to a single file using the `precice-events` python script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All these files of all participants then need to be post-processed and merged to a single file using the `precice-events` python script.
```

You can then use the resulting file to analyse the profiling data.

## Fundamental Events

Some events are useful for everyone, while others are only useful for developers.

> To keep this feature as useful as possible, we pre-selected a set of events, which we deem fundamental.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep this feature as useful as possible, we pre-selected a set of events that we deem fundamental.
```

> These include the main preCICE API functions and the time spend between these calls inside the solvers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These include the main preCICE API functions and the time spent between these calls inside the solvers.
```

Fundamental events should give you an insight in the overhead of preCICE as well as load imbalance between ranks etc.

Fundamental events are:

> * `SolverInterface` construction. This includes configuration and setting up the Intra-communication of each participant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `SolverInterface` construction. This includes configuration and setting up the intra-communication of each participant.
```
?

> * `solver.initialize` time spend in the solver until `initialize()` is called. This includes setting meshes, defining initial data and preparing the solver.
> * `initialize()` time spend in preCICE `initialize()`. This includes establishing communication between participants, mesh and data transfer, as well as mapping computation.
> * `solver.advance` time spend in the solver between `advance()` calls, including the time between `initialize()` and the first `advance()` call.
> * `advance()` time spend in preCICE `advance()`. This includes data mapping, data transfer, acceleration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `solver.initialize` time spent in the solver until `initialize()` is called. This typically includes setting up meshes, defining initial data and preparing the solver.
* `initialize()` time spent in preCICE `initialize()`. This includes establishing communication between participants, mesh and data transfer, as well as mapping computation.
* `solver.advance` time spent in the solver between `advance()` calls, including the time between `initialize()` and the first `advance()` call.
* `advance()` time spent in preCICE `advance()`. This includes data mapping, data transfer, acceleration.
```

## Measuring Blocking Operations

Some parts of preCICE involve communication, which cannot be interleaved efficiently with other computations.

> Measuring the runtime of such operations can be tricky, as the time spend waiting should be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Measuring the runtime of such operations can be tricky, as the time spent waiting should not be misinterpreted.
```

> Synchronizing all ranks using a barrier solved the issue, but has an impact on performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synchronizing all ranks using a barrier solves the issue, but has an impact on performance.
```

To keep this waiting component of the overall measurement to a minimum without affecting performance, we added a configuration option to toggle the synchonization before required events.
Use the `sync-mode` attribute to enable such synchonization if you need it.

```xml
<precice-configuration sync-mode="1">
    ...
</precice-configuration>

> ```

Reviewer: This, we still want to change. Then, it could make sense to first introduce the profiling tag.

## Configuration

> You can configure the profiling using the configuration file with the `<profiling/>` tag located inside `<precice-configuration>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure the profiling with the `<profiling/>` tag located inside `<precice-configuration>`.
```
The last part will need updating.

The default settings enable profiling of fundamental events and write the event files the working directory of each solver.

The full configuration consists of:

* `mode` either `off`, `fundamental` (default), or `all`
* `directory` location to create the `precice-events` folder in and write the event files to

> * the flush frequency  `flush-every`: `0` means only at the end of the simulation, `n>0` means to flush every n-records

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the flush frequency  `flush-every`: `0` means only at the end of the simulation, `n>0` means to flush every n records
```

### Examples

To turn the profiling off:

```xml
<precice-configuration>
  <profiling mode="off" />
</precice-configuration>
```

> To write all files into a common directory (often `..` works too):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To write the files of all participants into a common directory (often `..` works too):
```

```xml
<precice-configuration>
  <profiling director="/path/to/dir" />
</precice-configuration>
```

To prevent any write operations of the filesystem until the end of the simulation:

```xml
<precice-configuration>
  <profiling flush-every="0" />
</precice-configuration>
```

To profile blocking operations:

```xml
<precice-configuration sync-mode="1">
  <profiling mode="all" />
</precice-configuration>

> ```

Reviewer: Will need updating

## Post-processing workflow

The general workflow looks as follows:

1. Run the simulation
2. Merge the event files

> 3. Analyse each participants that executes a mapping

Reviewer: Why the focus on mappings?
Mesh repartitioning, acceleration, ... could also get important.

Author: Configuring a mapping often implies repartitioning. I added acceleration though.

> 3. Analyse each participants that executes a mapping
> 4. Analyse each participant to check for load-imbalance between ranks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Analyze each participants that executes a mapping
4. Analyze each participant to check for load-imbalance between ranks
```

5. Visualize the simulation to check for load-imbalance between participants

> The rest of the section will go through this process step by step.

Reviewer: Currently not true. I would suggest to simplify the process above.

Author: I reworded this to be more general.

### Merging Event Files

> After the simulation completes, you can find `precice-events` folders in the configured location, defaulting to the working directory of each solver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the simulation completes, you can find `precice-events` folders in the configured location, defaulting to the working directory of each participant.
```
Just to stick to the same name here.

An example could look like this:

```txt
.
├── A
│   └── precice-events
│       └── A-0-1.json
├── B
│   └── precice-events
│       └── B-0-1.json
└── precice-config.xml
```

To find and merge these files run:

```console
$ ls
A
B
$ precice-events merge A B
Searching A : found 1 files in A/precice-events
Searching B : found 1 files in B/precice-events
Found 2 unique event files
Found a single run for participant B
Found a single run for participant A
Loading event files
Globalizing event names
Grouping events
Aligning B (-179us) with A

> Writing to events.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing to events.json
$ ls
A
B
events.json
```
?

```

The merge command searches passed directories for the event files.

> You can also pass individual files if you are not interested in the other ranks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also pass individual files if you are not interested in all ranks
```

The merge command is written in pure python without external dependencies to make it easy to use on clusters.
After you run `precice-events merge`, you end up with a single file, which can be additionally compressed and transferred to another machine.
This is especially handy for very large and/or long simulations on clusters or supercomputers.

The result of this step is a single `events.json` file.

> ### Visualizing the Simulation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Visualizing the simulation
```

You can run `precice-events trace` to export the `events.json` file as `trace.json` in the [trace events format](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CvAClvFfyA5R-PhYUmn5OOQtYMH4h6I0nSsKchNAySU/preview).

```console
$ precice-events trace
Reading events file events.json
Writing to trace.json
```

This trace format can then be visualized using the following tools:

* [ui.perfetto.dev](https://ui.perfetto.dev)
* [profiler.firefox.com](https://profiler.firefox.com/)
* [speedscope.app](https://www.speedscope.app/)
* [`chrome://tracing/`](chrome://tracing/) in Chromium browsers [_(see full list)_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chromium_(web_browser)#Active)

> An example trace visualization using `ui.perfetto.dev` of a serial ASTE run looks as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example trace visualization using `ui.perfetto.dev` of a serial [ASTE](tooling-aste.html) run looks as follows:
```

![example of serial ASTE visualized by perfetto](images/docs/tooling/profiling-aste-perfetto-serial.png)

> An example trace visualization using `ui.perfetto.dev` of a paralle ASTE run on two ranks each looks as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example trace visualization using `ui.perfetto.dev` of a parallel [ASTE](tooling-aste.html) run on two ranks each looks as follows:
```

![example of parallel ASTE visualized by perfetto](images/docs/tooling/profiling-aste-perfetto-parallel.png)

> ### Analysing Participants

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Analyzing participants
```

    initialize/m2n.acceptSecondaryRanksConnection |   47853.0        1   47853.0   47853.0   47853.0
      initialize/m2n.broadcastVertexDistributions |       1.0        1       1.0       1.0       1.0
             initialize/m2n.buildCommunicationMap |    5491.0        1    5491.0    5491.0    5491.0
              initialize/m2n.createCommunications |     426.0        1     426.0     426.0     426.0
        initialize/m2n.exchangeVertexDistribution |   41864.0        1   41864.0   41864.0   41864.0
          initialize/partition.prepareMesh.B-Mesh |      36.0        1      36.0      36.0      36.0
    initialize/partition.receiveGlobalMesh.A-Mesh |  468944.0        1  468944.0  468944.0  468944.0
                     initialize/preprocess.B-Mesh |      26.0        1      26.0      26.0      26.0
                                   solver.advance |    2278.0        1    2278.0    2278.0    2278.0
                       solver.initialize.postinit |     178.0        1     178.0     178.0     178.0
                        solver.initialize.preinit |     925.0        1     925.0     925.0     925.0
```

</div>

The output for parallel solvers is slightly more complex.

> After the name of the event, the table contains three block, each containing the sum, count, mean, min, and max runtime for a specific rank.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the name of the event, the table contains three blocks, each containing the sum, count, mean, min, and max runtime for a specific rank.
```

> 1. the first block displays the primary rank (0)
> 2. the second block displays the secondary rank which spend the least total time in `advance`
> 3. the third block displays the secondary rank which spend the most total time in `advance`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The first block displays the primary rank (0).
2. The second block displays the secondary rank which spent the least total time in `advance`.
3. The third block displays the secondary rank which spent the most total time in `advance`.
```

<div style="display:block;overflow-x:auto" markdown="1">

```console
$ precice-events analyze B
Reading events file events.json
Output timing are in us.

> Selection contains the primary rank 0, the cheapest secondary rank 1, and the most expensive secondary rank 1.

Reviewer: Cheapest and most expensive ranks are identical in this example.

Author: Replaced it with an ASTE run

     initialize/query.index.getTriangleIndexTree.A-Mesh |   1224.0        1   1224.0   1224.0   1224.0 |   1781.0      1.0   1781.0   1781.0   1781.0 |   1781.0      1.0   1781.0   1781.0   1781.0
       initialize/query.index.getVertexIndexTree.A-Mesh |    281.0        1    281.0    281.0    281.0 |    431.0      1.0    431.0    431.0    431.0 |    431.0      1.0    431.0    431.0    431.0
                                         solver.advance | 138517.0        1 138517.0 138517.0 138517.0 |  12985.0      1.0  12985.0  12985.0  12985.0 |  12985.0      1.0  12985.0  12985.0  12985.0
                             solver.initialize.postinit |   1223.0        1   1223.0   1223.0   1223.0 |   1559.0      1.0   1559.0   1559.0   1559.0 |   1559.0      1.0   1559.0   1559.0   1559.0
                              solver.initialize.preinit |   4275.0        1   4275.0   4275.0   4275.0 |   5581.0      1.0   5581.0   5581.0   5581.0 |   5581.0      1.0   5581.0   5581.0   5581.0
```

</div>

### Processing in other software

You can run `precice-events export` to export the `events.json` file as `events.csv`.

> This contains a CSV data including all individual events from all participants and ranks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This contains CSV data including all individual events from all participants and ranks.
```

> It also contains data entries attached events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also contains additional data entries attached to events.
```
Could we give an example here?
